	It was necessary for Newton to build upon Aristotlelian nature by narrowing the scope of the Four Causes to examine a world where it was possible to experimentally determine how nature behaves.  Aristotelian nature concerns itself with funneling the universe into a taxonomic structure capable of exhaustively explaining all 'Why ?'s that may arise in the study of nature.  Aristotle uses his Four Causes as a tool of inquiry to expose the history, actions, and nature of things while answering the aforementioned question.  Though many state that Newton openly rejected Aristotelian thought, a filtered sample of Aristotle's Causes can be found in Newton's Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica, in the context of Newton's Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy.  Newton's Principia laid the foundation for experimental philosophy, the scientific method, and modern physics by examining mechanical interactions in the physical world through the obscured eyes of Aristotle.  
	Aristotle's Four Causes are dependent on his taxonomy of nature, so an understanding of the taxonomic structure in Aristotle's "Physics" is necessary to examine the path between Aristotelian and Newtonian nature.  At the top, there is a division between things that exist by nature (physis) and things that are products of art (techne), or man-made things (artificial).  The distinction between the two arises from their origins, but also from the way in which they behave over time and space.  Things of nature have innate principles of motion (kinesis) and rest (stasis) by which their state inherently evolves over time (metabole).  Techne lacks this metabole; however, it is clear that techne still has kinesis and stasis from simple observation of the behaviors of man-made objects.  The kinesis and stasis that is observed in techne can be attributed to the substances of which the techne is composed, assuming that all techne can be decomposed into some set of natural materials (prote hyle).  Thus, the prote hyle (material substrate) brought about by the same sort of decomposition of any thing can be seen as the essence or nature of that thing.  Though, once can imagine applying the aforementioned decomposition to natural materials, dividing them down to further isolate the essence (ousia qua substance) of natural materials.  This decomposition would boil down to the few kernels of natural essence (atomos) that compose the universe; the form of the universe would then be attributed to the state and arrangement of conglomerations of these atomos.  Further, the behavior of the universe could then be attributed to the superpostion of the nature and arrangement of atomos in space and time.  Or, as Carl Sagan puts it, “The beauty of a living thing is not the atoms that go into it, but the way those atoms are put together.”  Thus, nature may also be identified in the form (eidos) or temporal form (morphe) of a thing.  












It was necessary for Newton to build upon Aristotlelian Nature by narrowing the scope of the Four Causes to create a world where it was possible to experimentally determine how nature behaves.

Aristotelian Nature
Defines a taxonomic structure of the universe with which one can explore the causes of the universe
Physis
have kinesis and stasis, the combination of which is metabole
individual elements of physis are ousia, or substances
techne
does not have metabole
but the ousia in techne does!

Four causes are four different ways of answering 'Why?', though collectively, they exhaust the question.
The first three causes (Material, Formal, and Efficient) utilize Substance, Matter, Form, and Change to answer Why?
Substance, Matter, Form, and Change are all inherent properties of things that can be quantitatively measured
These are all physical.
The last cause uses telos to answer Why?.
Telos is the maximum point on the 'Essentiality vs. Time' plot. It cannot be quantitatively measured because it is often subjective. 
I'd argue that it is metaphysical.
When studying the physical, one can ignore telos since it is not a physical force, despite its presence as an Aristotelian force of nature.
Newton rejects Aristotelian views of nature to separate philosophy from experimental philosophy (modern science).
Newton is all about induction through physical or mathematical experiment.
Finds no truth in thought experiment, God.
Disregards telos
Is simply looking for the answer to Why?, but in the context of the purely physical realm.
So, does Newton really reject the Aristotelian causes?
Newton relies on the first three causes to produce his Newtonian Mechanics
The Final Cause is irrelevant, via Newton's 1st and 2nd Rules of Reasoning,
We are to admit no more causes of natural things than such as are both true and sufficient to explain their appearances.
Therefore to the same natural effects we must, as far as possible, assign the same causes.
So the answer is sort of, but only to the extent that he is removing the purely philosophical from the experimental.
Need to figure out Chance, Luck, etc.











An interesting aside is the application of the aforementioned decomposition to natural materials, dividing them down to further isolate the essence (ousia qua substance) of natural materials.  This decomposition would boil down to the few kernels of natural essence (atomos) that compose the universe; the form of the universe is simply the state and arrangement of conglomerations of these atomos.  Or, as Carl Sagan puts it, “The beauty of a living thing is not the atoms that go into it, but the way those atoms are put together.”   -  
